[Music]
so how much of a threat does this pose
to prime minister Netanyahu in his
Coalition and would his government
survive the Fallout from such a change
in policy we'll explore all these issues
with our panel of guests in a moment but
first this report from CA Lopez
hyan Ultra Orthodox Jews have always
been exempt from Israel's mandatory
military service that is set to change
but not without a
fight those protesting say as religious
Jews joining the Army contradict their
traditions and
lifestyle we preer dying we prer fing
the jails to the Army we're not going
full
St along with military exemptions the
ultra Orthodox also receive a government
subsidy if they study the Torah full
time in religious institutions Israel's
supreme court has ordered the government
to stop payments for those who defy the
draft it comes amid growing resentment
among those called to enlist
we want the ultra Orthodox in the Army
now no delays no politics and no
tricks the issue is a challenge for
Benjamin Netanyahu that could wreck his
Coalition he built an alliance with
right-wing groups to secure his term as
prime minister and overseeing an end to
the military exemption could be seen as
political
betrayal I am sure we can get this
agreement with a majority in the keset
but also one thing is clear to me it's
impossible to obtain a total
consensus it's been a controversial
issue for years but the war in Gaza has
turned it into an urgent one military
leaders say they need more people to
enlist and more people on the ground in
Gaza some ministers say they're ready to
resign if the exemption
continues this nation cannot accept it
and it should not be approved my
colleagues and I will not be members of
the emergency government if such
legislation passes and if it enters the
law books of
Israel the issue is controversial and
could Mark a significant shift in
Israeli Society one that could extend
well beyond Israel's war on Gaza K Yan
Al jazer for insight
[Music]
story so what's the significance of all
this for the Israeli people and the war
on Gaza and Beyond the question for
today's panel in West Jerusalem Ephraim
inbar the president of the Jerusalem
Institute for strategy and security that
aims to advise Israel's leaders in
defense and diplomatic matters in London
Yosi meckelberg is the associate fellow
at chattam house specializing in the
politics of Israel in the Middle East
and in Tel Aviv Marin rapor is the
editor of local call a Hebrew language
news site advancing citizen journalism
and an independent media thank you all
of you for joining us I'd like to get to
the ultra orth Orthodox first but there
are lots of countries around the world
that don't have what some call the draft
so let's get to the basic system first
if I can to you Ephraim just explain
what the basic rule is for Israelis as I
understand it with some exceptions
everyone at the age of 18 must
serve you are correct the law is that
everybody is to be enlisted there are
Exceptions there are two main exceptions
one is the Arab Israeli
we prefer not put not to put them in a
difficult position to fight their
cousins literally their cousins
sometimes and also the ultra Orthodox
that for historic reasons do not serve
initially when the state was established
there was a political agreement between
David benuron and the leadership of the
ultra Orthodox to allow them to uh lend
their legitimacy to the new established
state and the agreement was to allow a
few hundred 400 I
believe Boys in Yesa in uh schools of
higher Jewish learning to be exempt from
service this is how it started
during let let me bring in meron on this
because before again before we go to the
specific area of the ultra Orthodox just
explain it to me a little bit more if if
if you 18 years old and for example you
object to the current conflict that's
taking place in Gaza um on political
grounds if for example you believe that
Israel is not doing enough to get Aid in
as the international court of justice
says or if you believe there should be a
ceasefire now as the uh un Security
Council says is there an exemption for
you there if you if you if you have
political disagreements with the war
that Israel is involved
in no essentially no uh there are there
is a you could be exent on a
concial uh uh reasons but that is very
very difficult to
obtain uh there's you know all kind of
gray arrangement in which um you know
young uh uh people who who do not want
to serve find you know all kind of
health problems in order not to serve
but if you say that you don't want to
serve because you disagree with the with
the with the policies of the government
or the occupation or you name it you go
to
prison okay Yosi let's now turn to the
specific subject area here which is the
ultra Orthodox Community let's first
work out exactly who these people are if
you could give us a little bit of a
history lesson I mean these are the
Jewish communities that wear traditional
clothing Embrace tradition OS modern
values and practices just explain to me
who these communities are and where they
came to Israel
from well many of the ultra Orthodox
came from from east Europe the nowadays
you have Ultra Orthodox faradi ult
Orthodox political politically speaking
they have two party in in in theet Chas
in audat Israel and I think it's worth
reminding our audience and our viewers
that many of them actually opposed the
Zionist idea they also said this is
preempting the Messiah so the idea of
establishing a state went against their
Creed and they saw the Zionist movement
as a secular one many of them were
socialists or liberals and they opposed
it so the phenomenon of them moving many
of them you know you have Ultra Orthodox
that actually lived for hundreds of
years in in in what's known as ER Israel
the land of Israel but many of them
arrived after 1945 and after the
Holocaust and their tendency to begin
was to stay out of politics but realize
that by staying out of politics there is
a heavy price in terms of of being close
to to power and what power comes with
now one of the thing that the fry
mentioned earlier at the early days of
of the country the first Prime Minister
exempt around 400 of them from serving
in in in in the milit in the IDF and I
think there are two pillars to this
exemption one is is I think the some of
the more secular soft spot towards those
who dedicate their life to study the
Jewish Theology and I think also there
is which become more and more important
as we come to the topic today is the
needs to for the need of the more
secular parties whether it's in the past
labor or could nowadays for their
support in order to form a coalition
without paying certain
ideological price when it comes to the
issue with the
Palestinians Ephraim then if you can
bring us up to date you said earlier you
thought that the estimate was about 400
in
1948 how many now and how politically
powerful are this
group well
uh there are several cohorts age cohorts
that were not enlisted
and after a certain age after all the
Army doesn't call you so we are talking
about close to
70,000 uh youngsters between age of 18
and 24 25 that could be called into
service but they are exempt this is a
quite a large number the political power
of the ultra Orthodox as Yosi has
mentioned has increased over time
because there are not left or right but
in the middle politically in in modern
terms and they basically can join any
Coalition and therefore they can
maneuver uh politically much
better as a result of that they get a
lot of uh of the benefits of the states
and recently in the past maybe 20 years
they have become part of the rightwing
block making a coalition with Netanyahu
also in Jerusalem was who all previous
prime minister and this Coalition is now
of course threatened by the issue of
enlistment Maron then let's let's bring
it right up to date and why it's become
such a huge issue now seems to me there
are two aspects one is the conflict in
Gaza and two there's been a long running
court process that seems to be coming to
a head first um in terms of the war on
Gaza how the fact that this community
does not I believe there are some that
have volunteered to fight but doesn't
send soldiers at this time when Israel
is at War how does the rest of the
country feel about
that that has always been a sensitive
issue the fact that uh such a large
community that is growing bigger because
the the birth rate there is is twice or
even third uh three times higher than in
in the in the rest of the population so
uh the tension that uh such a large
number of young people do not serve uh
has always been a sensitive issue
certainly after the the you know the
shock of October 7th and the war on Gaza
and the fact that uh Israel lost uh more
than
650 soldiers that's a whole Brigade
almost that were killed 3,000 were
wounded uh soldiers so the Army really
needs and and and the prospect is of a
prolonged war in Gaza and maybe in
Lebanon and we don't know uh where else
so so uh the Army really needs uh more
soldiers they're talking about that they
need at least uh more 7,000 soldiers new
soldiers in in the draft in the regular
draft and that's uh that's something
that uh uh puts more pressure on the
ultra Orthodox in on this tension
between the secular side of Israel and
the the ultra Orthodox it has to be
added as a f said that in the last uh I
would say 15 years the Orthodox Al
Orthodox have become a major
almost founding uh part of Nan's
Coalition of right-wing Coalition
rightwing block and therefore going
against nany when uh the secular what is
called now the liberal camp in in in
Israel is going against netan is also
aiming at the old Orthodox because
because this is the weakest uh uh I
would say part of the chain of the of
the of the um of the right-wing block
because they're not liked uh by the
seculars they're not really liked by
even the the religious the the National
Religious the settlers they're not liked
by them because the settlers go to the
Army and the Orthodox don't they're not
zist as as Yosi mentioned or not
declared
so there are lot of tension they are the
weakest uh uh part of the right wi block
and therefore when the liberal uh Camp
attack uh there are also an easier
Target as I said there's you see been a
long running Court proceedings going on
here very long running just bring us up
to speed of where we are now because
that has come to a head as well at this
time when Israel is at
War
yes because there are many issues Beyond
actually the military service first I
think we the the fact that they have a
voting pattern the ultra Orthodox that
tells you almost you know in advance of
any election how many member of neset
they are going to how many seats they
are going to gain and they can become
Kings makers with this also come that
they want ideologically to impose more
and more religious laws and moving
towards more Alaric state which upsets
the the more liberal minded then on top
of it what upsets many of of the of the
secular those who serve in the army that
those who are not going to the Army the
ult Orthodox at the age of 18 they
actually are paid by the government so
their rabanal seminars that were
mentioned earlier are basically
sponsored by those who later you know
first serve in the Army then are going
to to work in something that's in in
jobs that generates wealth in the
society and pay for those that a don't
serve in the Army B study in this
rabanal seminars topics and issues
mainly it's it's Jewish Juris prudence
and and and scholarly that's not going
to gener generate wealth what now this
high court of justice says that if they
don't serve in the Army then also that
this money from the public PSE shouldn't
be be be paid to this bcal seminars it's
it's an attempt actually to create some
equality within the burden that you have
in every society who actually those who
carry the burden whether it's in this
case military service creating a
prosperous economy and you are the one
that actually if you look at the
statistics in Israel the ultra Orthodox
pay one nth when it comes to taxes to
what to what the secular one or at least
the secular and those who are not Ultra
Orthodox religious that not Ultra
Orthodox and that's what the kind of
what you know the appeals to the high
court of justice and the decision by the
high court of justice is trying to
rectify Ephraim this current headache
for prime minister netanyahu's as we
heard comes from the justice system um
of course the backdrop from this over
the last year is that the Prime Minister
was having a battle about changing that
system well I think uh this is uh
something that happens in many countries
over the division of power between the
Parliament and the supreme court of
justice we see it in the United States
in many other Democratic countries I
personally favor you know limiting the
power of the Supreme Court of justice
that imposes its values on the rest of
the society such decision should be made
by by the parliament this is my
objection
but I think the the issue is is
different I think the secular uh
population is
frightened by the fertility rate of uh
of the ultra Orthodox and if this
demographic trend
continues and I'm not sure it will
continue because it can be somehow
managed it will make the
secularists and even smaller
minority and you know the Israeli
Society has is not dichotomic it has
Ultra Orthodox National Religious which
are modern Orthodox people and a large
part of traditional Jews and the
secularists are actually a minority they
have been you know the
founding element of of the Israeli State
and they become a minority and it's it's
a struggle for power and of course it it
annoys not only the secularist what is
happening with the service with the
military service with the old Orthodox
so in this respect they can find allies
among other elements of the population
in order to bring a
change in the habits of the ultra
Orthodox maybe forcing them to some
extent into modernizing and becoming
part of a modern economy and thereby
changing somewhat their views and
limiting their uh political
influence Yosi if I can ask you to take
a look inside prime minister netanyahu's
Coalition and just explain to us how
divided the cabinet is on this and how
much of a problem it is for the Prime
Minister who in the past in building
cabinets has been described by some as a
bit of a politic Houdini how's he going
to get out of this
one well it's it's it's a tough one
because if he's losing the ultra
Orthodox if they living the Coalition he
has no Coalition because it will be
followed also most probably by by people
like Ben gun and and and Eisen Cod they
joined only because of of of of the war
and they due to leave the Coalition and
for the ultra Orthodox this is one of
the major issue one of the source of of
the supporting them is because they the
one that put pressure on any Coalition
on any government and prime minister to
exempt him from from milit military
service there are a lot of C there to
square and I don't I think it's it's the
question here if they can legislate
because always through legislation they
can change the decision by the high
court of justice in a way that is you
know then that's why it's so important
to resist what netan called the reforms
because whether it's reasonable and and
most most people in Israel think that's
exempting the ultra Orthodox is
unreasonable but there are ways to
resolve it it doesn't mean that tomorrow
all the all the old Orthodox which at
the age of military service should be
should be mobilized into the army there
are ways to resolve it so some of them
that want to join the Army be mobilized
by reducing the the financial support of
rabanal seminar maybe taxation of those
that don't serve and incentivize those
who want to want to serve in the Army
but this needs really a national
discussion around this issue because it
divides the country meon picking up on
that point I mean if they were forced to
serve all these Ultra Orthodox how
exactly would that work would they be
willing soldiers would they serve in
front line combat um units would they
work cohesively in the military what's
your what's your view on
that I think this is very far away
although um theoretically from tomorrow
uh uh the the the law is abolished the
law that allows them the uh not to serve
is abolished and they should serve and
the funding from the government should
stop to the yeshivas to
the ranal seminars should stop tomorrow
uh I think the chances that this will
happen are very slim uh they may uh
refuse to serve uh and if we are talking
about tens of thousands I think it will
be impossible uh for for for the Army uh
to to to lock up uh thousands and
thousands of yiva BOS uh it will not
happen uh the Army is completely
unprepared uh to to to get them they you
have to understand that they come also
with very limited education general
education they don't know English for
example they don't uh they don't know
mathematics uh it will be extremely
difficult uh to enlist them uh you will
have to change the Army in order to to
give them the opportunity for culture uh
uh Ms and culture training even meaning
that they will not train with
women uh so it's very very complicated I
think the issues still now is more
political I think Netanyahu is in a very
weak point I weak point I think that
detention within his own Camp I'm not
talking even in the General Public
within his own Camp are
growing uh to allow for uh uh old these
Ultra Orthodox not to serve is not
accepted as I said by the settlers for
example let me let let me bring Ephraim
in on that point I mean how difficult a
moment is this for prime minister
Netanyahu not just this issue but
there's the failure to free the captives
still being held by Hamas there's
growing tensions between the US and
Israel particularly over the planned
offensive there you've got a un Security
Council resolution two sets of
international court of justice
provisional measures making Israel some
would say um getting more of a par
status how difficult is this now for the
Prime
Minister obviously Nan is in a very
difficult position because of domestic
problems and international pre
pressure ER winning the war will change
uh uh something and this means defying
to some extent the United States
although we share the same goal of
defeating Hamas with with the United
States as well as many Arab
countries and he will try to find a
compromise on the ultra Orthodox
enlistment because if this issue becom
Central uh in the next election it will
be political suicide actually I wor him
personally about it Yi um if we just
look at this if if Netanyahu was to fall
over this I mean in the middle of Israel
still involved in a conflict in Gaza
what then happens I assume you have new
elections and then he stays on as the
caretaker prime minister doesn't he and
and that it takes a long time from my
experience of to organize elections in
Israel he could still be prime minister
quite a long time even if he was
toppled well if if we if you believe
public opinion pools and they are quite
you know continuously consistent that
the public wants netan out and not
surprisingly so so what Israel needs is
is election many of people that
supported the netan and lud party in the
last election say outright that they
don't want to see netan anymore as prime
minister not even Le leud and power they
are looking for something else at the
end of the day what we see in Israel
domestic and internationally the mess
that Israel is right now in the name of
Netanyahu is all over it whether forming
the most rightwing and incompetent
government in the country's history not
being prepared for October 7 the the
judicial the judici the assault of the
judicial ER on the independence of the
Judiciary what we see now with the AL
that's all because Netanyahu is facing
corruption trial is stying is trying to
stay indefinitely as prime minister in
order also to stay possibly out of jail
and Israel can move forward only if and
when netan is
out Yosi thank you very much and thanks
to all our guests today Ephraim inbar
Yosi meckelberg and Maron rapor and
thanks to you for watching if perhaps
you didn't catch the whole program you
can always watch this and any of our
other shows anytime on our website
al.com we'd like to hear your thoughts
on this subject too go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story or you can
find us on X we at AJ insid story from
all the team here in Doha please stay
safe I'll see you back here very soon
bye-bye for
[Music]
now